
Antarctica project
Research log

by Aniko B Toth 

The purpose of this research log is to keep track of the Antarctic project. 
I will use this to log weekly/monthly progress and write down thoughts and questions. 

Mid-April, 2020 (Introduction)
I commenced working on this project near the middle of April. 
I was given a compilation datasets and previous analyses on Antarctica by Aleks Terauds. The aim of the project is to use this and other data to produce an IUCN Red List of Ecosystems style typology for Antarctic ice-free ecosystems, describe each ecosystem, and perform risk assessments for those ecosystems which have enough data. 

The first month or so was spent familiarising myself with the existing datasets and reading as much recent literature as possible about Antarctic ecosystems. 

Datasets: 
1. Current delieation of Antarctic Biogeograpic Regions (ACBRs)
2. Polygons of Antarctic ice-free areas
3. Cluster analysis of evenly distributed point measurements in ice-free areas based on climatic and environmental data (raw data wasn't provided), aimed at determining the main habitat types in Antarctica.
4. Compiled species observational data from 1800s to mid 2010s; most data from 1960-2010. 


25th May 2020

The first task is the delineation of Antarctic ecosystems. The main challenges involved in this process is the lack of knowledge about Antarctica. While many places have been described and sampled for macro and micro faunas, the main consensus appears to be that there is a vast variability of faunas, with ice-free areas (IFAs) acting essentially as islands. Most researchers seem to think the greatest threats are introduced species and the possibilitity that warming climates and melting ice will increase the invasibility of previously very isolated patches of unique habitat. 

In the past 3 weeks, I have taken a first stab at constructing a rudimentary typology. My reasoning is that unique ecosystems should be delineated by a uniqueness of environmental variables (such as the aforementioned, previously calculated habitat types) and the faunas which inhabit them, which may include keystone species that provide some uniqueness to the ecosystem. Therefore, I resolved to examine the faunas of each IFA and use cluster analyses to establish if there are any typical or characteristic faunas in Antarctica. The procedure I followed is below: 

1. Spatial join species occurrences with IFAs to produce presence-absence matrices (rows are species, columns are unique IFAs). One presence-absence matrix per decade (e.g. 1960s, 1970s, etc.), such that species had to be sampled in the same IFA in the same decade in order to be co-occurring.  

2. Select IFAs with 5 or more species documented within a decade, and species with 5 or more observations within a decade, such that marginal totals are all 5 or more in each decade's matrix. The point of this is to ensure that "typical" assemblages are not based on matching faunas in 2 or 3 IFAs. They must be observed in 5 or more IFAs. In the resulting matrices, it is possible for IFAs and species to occur in only one decade, or several decades. IFAs that were sampled adequatedly in multiple decades would, for instance, be included in each matrix with the species data that was collected in that decade. Also removed records that were not identifed to species level and those with .cf in the name, as the classification of these is uncertain. 

3. Run a co-occurrence analysis on the P-A matrices. Fisher's Exact Test (mid-P variant) was used, which is what I used for my PhD thesis, so I understand it very well. Other metrics could be used but I am confident of this metric's conservative performance and its reliability in boundary cases (e.g. very rare or very common species).

4. Build a co-occurrence network with the strongest 10% of aggregations, and perform a cluster analysis (used igraph package, cluster_fast_greedy function).

5. Create an incidence matrix of species by clusters. Clusters are unique to each decade. A quick PCA allows us to see how clusters persist over time. 

6. Run another co-occurrence and cluster analysis, but this time on the first set of clusters. This reduces the number of species groupings, and accounts for small shifts in cluster composition over time. Sometimes two smaller clusters in one time interval, for example, are linked together by a larger cluster in another time interval. The resulting groups are our unique assemblage indicators. 

7. Now we have to identify which assemblage best characterises each IFA. I used the assemblage from which each IFA has the most species (as opposed to the highest percentage of species, which I also calculated-- the two measures matched in about 70% of cases).

8. Calculated the dominant habitat type in each IFA. Did this by performing a spatial join on habitat points and IFAs, then weighting each point by the inverse of its distance from the IFA plus 1 metre (to avoid Inf values). I took the sum of each habitat type in each IFA, and chose the highest one to determine the dominant habitat type. 

9. I defined an ecogroup (not an ecosystem yet...), as each unique combination of Assemblage and habitat type that I observed after joining the results of the assemblage and habitat analyses. 

### Results: 
Three general assemblage types. Group 1 is dominated by fungi, cyanobacteria, and some mosses, and occurs all over the Antarctic mainland, as well as occasionally on the peninsula. Ecogroups hab7_grp1 and hab8_grp1 dominate the bulk of the continent. This group also contains Ochrophyta, Rotifers, Tardigrades, Chlorophyta, and some arthropods. 

Group 2 is dominated by (presumably mostly different) fungi and mosses. It is found only on the peninsula and nearby islands. 

Group 3 is dominated by vertebrates (basically all penguins, seabirds, and pinnipeds), along with an apparently complimentary suite of arthropods, nematodes, and mosses. It is found mostly on the peninsula but with occasional isolated occurrences around the coast of the continent.

### Discussion (to be discussed with David and Aleks at next meeting):

Species can occur in more than one group and this is especially true for common species. For instance, Adelie penguins are the only chordate in group 1, but they are also included in group 3. Chinstrap and Gentoo penguins, antarctic pearlwort and hair grass are all in both groups 2 and 3. 
*** need to check for overlaps among groups in the fungi, arthropods, and mosses particularly*** 

Many species are not in a group (most are too rare). If we were to classify them it would be by examining what they co-occur with the one or two times they were sampled. 

IFAs can change ecogroup over time, and this does seem to happen a fair bit. 

Potential sampling problems:
I am concerned that these preliminary assemblage groups may be influenced by sampling effort, namely, because researchers have target taxa that they are sampling when they go on expeditions. So an expedition that goes to count seabirds will not sample cyanobacteria in the same sites, and this may account for why most phyla seem to fall primarily into one of the three assemblage groups. This may cause artificial separation between my assemblage groups. 
Most literature says that biotic interactions have very little effect on community assembly in the Antarctic, because the ability to survive the harsh conditions is much more important. However, group 3 seems to have a specific suite of bugs, mosses, and nematodes. Is it possible that there's a suite of species that are supported by nesting seabird colonies (like nematodes living in the guano or something)? Do seabirds take these commensals/parasites with them wherever they establish colonies?

Potentially need to find finer delineations within group 1. Could be that a separate analysis should be run with the peninsula excluded to be able to detect such finer delineations?

Several IFAs (most islands) didn't make it into the habitat calculation analysis; probably need to add them if possible. 

Need to align ecogroup delinations with the ecosystems described within the global ecosystem typology. 


28 May 2020

Update on results:

Group 1 has 154 species; Group 2 has 122 species; Group 3 has 73 speces. 

Two species of plants are classified in all three groups: 
Hennediella heimii (a moss) and Prasiola crispa (a green algae), and thus cannot be used to classify an assemblage. Both have global distributions. 

Twenty-one species are in both groups 1 and 2 (19 not counting the two above; 10 species of fungi and 9 species of mosses). About half the fungus species but none of the mosses are specific to the antarctic and sub-antarctic. 

Sixteen species (14 not counting the two at top) are in both groups 2 and 3. This includes 2 species of fungi, 7 species of mosses, 2 vertebrates (Chinstrap and Gentoo penguins), and 2 vascular plants (Antarctic hair grass and Antarctic pearlwort). One fungus is specific to the Antarctic peninsula, the other has a global distribution. One moss species is specific to the Antarctic peninsula, the others are global. 

There are six overlapping species between groups 1 and 3; four excluding the two found in all three groups. They are: 1 vertebrate (Adelie penguin), 1 liverwort (Cephaloziella exiliflora-- also found in Australia), 1 nematode (Plectus antarcticus, specific to Antarctica), and 1 tardigrade (Hypsibius dujardini, global in distribution).

Discussion

In terms of unique antartic ecosystems it's probably worth defining which species are unique to antarctica and which species are not. Slightly different from this but related, which species pose invasion risk and which species are more likely to be detrimentally affected by invasives. This classification can be used to determine how irreplaceable each community or ecosystem is, and/or to what extent it has already been disrupted (and when? if we have dates).

All three groups occur on the Antarctic peninsula, and there doesn't appear to be a spatial pattern, they are all mixed together. Perhaps there is an environmental reason (e.g. rugosity/slope) why one assemblage or another dominates in an IFA. Worth checking how distinct the assemblages in these IFAs are (do they contain many shared species, for instance? How many species from each group? The ecogroups were determined by taking the group from which the most species are present).


3 June 2020

Futher analysis of the 3 typical assemblages has revealed the following. 
Group 2 is a jumble of mostly Ascomycota and Bryophyta, without any immediately apparent internal structure. 

Groups 1 and 3 both have strong internal structuring. Both groups separate at least partially along phylum lines, which implicates sampling as the main driver of structure (e.g. people sampling members of only 1 or 2 phyla in an IFA, another team sampling different phyla in another IFA, etc.). Group 1 separates roughly into 2 big subgroups. One subgroup (say 1.1) is comprised of Bryophytes and Ascomycotes, the second subgroup (1.2) consists of Cyanobacteria, Chlorophyta (green algae), rotifers, etc. Both groups have a few tardigrades.
Group 3 separates cleanly into 5 subgroups, one of Nematodes, one group of Chordates, Bryophytes, Arthropods, and Tardigrades, respectively. 

Because sampling is apparently so pervasive in determining assemblage structure in each IFA, it may be worth looking for community structure instead within each phylum (although apparently Ascomycota and Bryophyta can be kept together).


5 June 2020

Meeting with Aleks and David for updates (9-10am)

Notes: 
Subantarctic islands should be included in a later phase of the project; for now focusing on Antarctic mainland and perhaps very closely associated islands only. 

Antarctic lakes should be included - these are their own ecosystem type. Antarctic lakes vary greatly in salinity, and may require a delineation somewhere along the gradient, as hypersaline and freshwater lakes are quite different. 
Spatial data on Antarctic lakes is available, but may be regional and probably needs to be collated on a continental scale. 

Geothermal sites are another unique thing again; these will probably be excluded for now. Existing spatial data includes active and dormant/extinct volcanic sites, so for now it's not really a good indicator of diversity. 

In terms of the global typology, Antarctic ecosystems (excl. the lakes) will fall in two main categories: polar cliffs/screes/outcrops/lava flows and polar tundra/desert. It will be useful to think in these contexts. 

I updated the team on the analyses described in the last few entries. There is a consensus that there's a strong sampling signal, because of the taxonomic separations between many of the clusters and subclusters. Aleks suggested repeating the analysis with a grid-site system instead of IFA's as the sites. This may help deal with sampling issues. 

Aleks suggested that the results of the SDMs might also help resolve sampling difficulties. 

The group is agreed however that including species data in the determination of the typology is a novel idea that may become very useful in broader contexts if actualised. 

Habitat types, which I have not written about yet, were determined by the previous work of Aleks's team using a fuzzy cluster analysis (cmeans). In the last month I have played around with the variables included in the analysis as well as the number of clusters, but these do not seem to make a major difference in the analysis. We will discuss this more later. 

Aniko and Aleks will meet next week to go over the details together. Aniko will prepare some visuals and send them early next week for Aleks to go over: 

(1) Habitat types analyses- variations 
(2) Results of current cluster analyses including shapefiles and alluvial plot
(3) Same as (2) but for grid squares as sites instead of IFAs.

David will get in touch with all collaborators on the grant and schedule a larger group meeting; Aniko to prepare agenda and materials for the meeting. 


9-10 June 2020

Working on producing some nice reports of the analyses so far. Will send these to Aleks in preparation for our follow-up meeting on Friday. 

11-12 Jun 2020

Working on new cluster analyses split by taxon (Phylum) instead of decade. Assumption is that assemblages have higher longevity in Antarctic because of the cold/slow metabolisms etc. Things that are there in one decade are likely to be present in the next. 

Procedure is slightly different; we make co-occurrence (aggregation-only) networks for each phylum, run cluster analysis, and look for membership of sites in each cluster. Idea is to look for spatial agreement between the clusters of different taxa, to try to classify IFAs into ecosystem types. 

Code for the analysis will be copied partially from species_script.R and saved in a new script called phylum_script.R.

Prep materials for Aleks have been summarised in 2 documents called Antarctic_habitats.html and Antarctic_assemblages.html; both will be pushed to remote repository on github for eventual group access. 

15 June 2020 

Meeting was moved to Monday (today) at 12 noon. 

Notes: Aleks and Aniko went over the habitat classifications derived from subsets of the variables. Based on results we agreed on an 8-habitat weighted classification scheme using: rugosity [rugos], elevation [elev], distance to coast [coast], wind, precipitation [precip], degree days [DDminus5], and solar radiation [rad]. 
These variables were chosen based on minimization of redundance, expert (Aleks's) knowledge of the literature, and the importance/frequency of each variable in the SDM calculations. The 8 groups are somewhat arbitrary, and thus up for debate if necessary.

Aniko added Aleks as collaborator in gitHub repository. Members of the team will be able to look at updates on the .Rmd files, which will be updated periodically. 
We also went over the methods and results of the assemblages cluster analysis.
We examined the taxonomic makeup of the 3 species clusters discussed at the last meeting and took a look at the shapefile of their distributions. We believe there is some good material there despite some obvious sampling issues and a lack of occurrence data in most ice-free areas. 

Decided on some next steps: 

1. Split cluster analysis by taxon instead of decade; taxon delineations to follow the functional groupings chosen for the SDM analysis. 

2. Use the SDM probability surfaces to identify probable suitable habitat for functional taxa. Use probable occurrences in new cluster analysis, to integrate biological data into ecosystem classification scheme.

3. Perform the biotic cluster analysis on grid cells instead of IFAs; to be done once SDM-based "occurrences" are calculated. 

4. Classify species based on whether their distributions are global or specific to the Antarctic; most species seem to fall cleanly in one of these two categories, and this should help us formulate an idea of the uniqueness/irreplaceability of individual assemblages. 


29 June 2020
Haven't written an update a quite a while, and a lot has occurred in that time. 
The main developments are summarised here.

Aleks has sent along SDMs of Antarctic 'functional' taxa. We have been talking about using these functional taxa as the main biotic unit of analysis, to avoid the huge variety and poor sampling of individual species, and also because ecosystem classifications for the Red List hinge on the functional characteristics of ecosystems. 

Based on the suitability rasters from the conditional SDMs, I've run a co-occurrence analysis on the functional groups (threshold for presence top 50% of suitability range). The interepretation is a bit different from normal co-occurrence stuff because these are pseudo-presences and the units are functional taxa, not species. The analysis clarified that Antarctic ecosystems are fundamentally nested, i.e. there's a gradient from suitable to non-suitable habitats which is along the same axis for most taxa; the most suitable sites have all the taxa while the least suitable sites have only the hardiest taxa. Nested sites are very difficult to classify, because there are no obvious cutoffs, and almost all pairs are aggregated. 

Nonetheless, there were a few segregations, and taxa that had at least one segregation were used in a PCA analysis of the SDM pixels (based on suitability). The PCA confirmed the high nestedness of sites but also identified a few exceptions. Notably, a cluster of sites which are suitable for most taxa are not suitable for Ochrophytes (brown algae), a very hardy group. These sites turn out to be mostly in the Central South Antarctic Peninsula bioregion. 
Similarly, another cluster of sites which are in the higher range of suitability for most species are not suitable for Tardigrades, another very hardy taxon.

One possible approach is to set thresholds around the physiological limits of certain keystone species, such as vertebrates, mosses, or lichens. We need to explore these possibilities with the group. 


6 July 2020

A meeting of the full research group has been scheduled for July 10th at 10am. 
Agenda: 
1.	Introductions
2.	Review of proposal and project phases 
3.	Update on Antarctic typology, and discussion of approaches.
4.	Discussion of data for risk assessments, particularly time series data, and how we can collect these.
5.	Things to start thinking about 
   a.	Extending analyses to include the marine shelf
   b.	What roles do people want to take in the project?
   c.	Rough timeline for completing typology component


Progress on analyses: 
I changed to using the non-conditional SDMs, as suggested by Aleks.

Aleks reviewed the SDM results to clarify previous ambiguities about which models were reliable. This resulted in the exclusion of 9 unreliable models: 

Chordata_Aves_Sphenisciformes_Spheniscidae_Pygoscelis_adeliae,
Chordata_Aves_Procellariiformes___,
Arthropoda_Entognatha_Poduromorpha___,
Bryophyta_Bryopsida_Grimmiales___,
Cyanobacteria_____,
Tardigrada_____,
Marchantiophyta_____,
Ascomycota_Lecanoromycetes_Lecanorales_Lecideaceae__, and
Ascomycota_Lecanoromycetes_Umbilicariales_Umbilicariaceae__.

The co-occurrence analysis was run again using SDM-based pseduopresences, but with the threshold raised to 0.85 of the suitability range for a pseudo-presence. All of these changes together resulted in even fewer segregations than before. 

I also repeated the PCA with all of the reliable models, rather than just those that produce segregations. The results show a greater range of variability in the loadings, while still supporting the notion of a nested community structure. 

Finally, I performed a spatial join on the habitat and SDM pixels (SDM pixels contain 4x habitat pixels each). I aggregated the data from habitat pixels to produce climatic/environmental estimates for each SDM pixel. I then performed the cmeans algorithm on the SDM pixels instead. 

Interestingly, the cmeans algorithm seems to produce very messy results for clusters (when summarised using a PCA space), however, the output clusters are much more consistent than for the habitat clusters, and the algorithm converges after much fewer iterations. This seems to suggest that the output clusters when using SDM pixels are not as arbitrary as we feared. On the other hand, the messy results make the habitats harder to interpret. I am not sure why the results are so messy, given that only the previously determined subset of abiotic variables was included. 

I have also integrated the new SDM pixel-based habitat clusters on the PCA space produced by the suitability maps. The output shows some interesting patterns, although it is still pretty messy.                                                         

The PCA results suggest a divide between the Antarctic peninsula and the mainland, though the clusters are not consistently separated. The loadings suggest that functional groups arrange themselves in 5 distinct groups of suitability. Group 1 prefers the peninsula over the mainland and requires proximity to the coast. Group 5 (Ochrophyta all by itself) prefers the mainland to the peninsula. The others are in between. Groups 3 and 4 distinctly prefer some particular aspect of both the mainland and peninsula. 

15 July 2020

Large group meeting 10 July at 10am. Everyone was there except Steven Chown (Aleks, David, Justine, Johnny, Nick, and myself).

Presented data, spatial units, and typology work so far. 
Suggestions from the group: 

(1) Use supervised classification method, use biotic clusters as a training set for classification of abiotic clusters. 
(2) Use both biotic and abiotic variables as in Lyons et al. 2017. 
(3) Look at the interaction of habitat clusters by ACBR; combine them into groups if warranted by species or functional group occurrences.
(4) In general, lumping oversplit typology with expert input. 
(5) Resolve cmeans by performing multiple cmeans runs and looking for consensus between them. 

Target 40-60 units, definitely more than 20 and less than 100. 
Target spatial resolution 1km pixels.

David to share slides and notes with the group post-meeting. 
Aniko to continue following up with Aleks. 

Post meeting: 
Yesterday I followed up on point (3) above; 81 units with more than 20 pixels assigned to them resulted; 60 of these had species occurrences recorded in them. Network analysis of similarity between units using occurrence of functional groups within units suggested a classification where the 60 units were lumped into 48 clusters (most units in a group by themselves).

Still might try points (1) and (2) above.



3 August 2020

Still working on finalising the preliminary typology.

Habitat classifications: 
Spent several days experimenting with points (1) and (2) above, but decided not to use them because the biotic classifications tend to be dominated by one or two variables, and this is the case when biotic clusters are calculated in isolation and when they are combined with abiotic variables to produce a classification. 

I settled on the approach using point (5) above, supplemented by points (3) and (4). I ran 100 cmeans iterations with 8 centres each, allowing them to converge. I then matched up each habitat with its closest relative in every pairwise combination of outputs (in most cases there is an obvious match, which helps), and made a network of these, keeping links between habitats with 80% or more overlap. Then I ran cluster analysis on the resulting network. Some habitats come out as a distinct cluster every time -- these break off into a densely connected subgraph in the network, containing one vertex per rep (so in this case 100 or very close to it). In other cases, cmeans always breaks a cloud of points into 2 clusters, but it's inconsistent on where the break is, which results in those habitats being lumped (which is good, since there's no consensus on a divide; an example is cluster 4 in the final classification). The network approach ultimately indicated 7 clusters (although this *can* certainly be manipulated, for example by changing the minimum cutoff for for an edge to be included in the network and the number of centres given to cmeans in the first place). 

Finally, I used the network results to place each pixel into the cluster in which it was placed the most often. The consensus was pretty strong, only about 800 pixels (out of more than 60k) were classified on the agreement of fewer than 40 models out of 100, and most were classified on the agreement of 90 or more models.

Typological unit classification:
 The final, consensus-based habitat classification was broken out into ACBRs; out of 105 possible combinations, 81 units were represented by at least 1 pixel; 67 units have 20 pixels or more, and 55 had point occurrences. Point occurrences--lumped by functional group-- were used to quantify the similarity between the 55 units. These were used to construct a network, keeping links stronger than the 98.5% quantile of all the scores. A second cluster analysis on the resulting network identified 41 units (i.e. the 55 units were lumped into 41). Usually lumping occurred between units that were either in the same ACBR or had the same habitat. The 26 units without point occurrences received their own unit number at this step. Because these are so small, I will attempt to lump them at the next step. So at this stage we have 41+26 = 67 units, some quite tiny.
 
At this stage, most large pixels (SDM pixels) were classified into one of these 67 units, however, 7786 pixels remained unclassified because we do not have abiotic variables for them, and therefore they had to be excluded from the consensus cmeans approach. This is a little too many for comfort (more than 10% of pixels), so I decided to try and place each of these pixels within an existing unit. 

I calculated the most similar unit to each pixel based on SDM suitability values for the 25 reliable models. This resulted in most pixels being matched with a very distant unit, so I also calculated the minimum distance between each pixel and the five most similar units. Most pixels had a match within 500km, but some did not. At this point it occurred to me that most of the pixels without habitat classifications were off the coast of the mainland (e.g. on small island outcrops), and that perhaps these types of habitats should have their own unit. To be discussed with Aleks at our next catch up (this this Wednesday the 5th).

Using ArcMap, I determined which points were not on the mainland, and then used a spatialJoin to match each one to the nearest land polygon. The idea is that such pixels can be sorted by the size of the bits of land that intersect with them. A separate unit could then be created for small coastal islands, and perhaps these could be grouped by size if necessary. Offhand, I'd guess these pixels are quite a unique habitat, because not only are they directly on the ocean, they are surrounded on all sides by ocean, and thus probably lack certain characteristics of pixels that are on the mainland (e.g. they are not protected from the water on some sides, invasion only possible over water, etc.). 

Some remaining pixels which still remain unclassified after this process will be either ignored or placed into units using the approach outlined above (SDM and geographic proximity). Stand by for results...
 
 5 Aug 2020
 
Created 3 new units, for three different offshore island sizes. They are: Offshore Islands 0-1 km2, 1-100 km2, and more than 100 km2 (exact size distinctions are up for discussion). Unclassified pixels whose nearest landmass was the mainland were classified into units based on the nearest classified pixel, if that pixel was situated within 6km of the focal pixel, and otherwise left unclassified at this step.

After this procedure, 2501 pixels were still left unclassified. These were targeted with a similarity approach based on the SDM results. Pixels were classified based on SDM similarity and proximity to existing units. SDM suitability values were translated into pseudo-presences, and this data was run through similarity analysis (using FETmP but on pixels instead of species). The pixels are assigned to the most similar unit whose closest pixel is within 100 km of the focal pixel. This analysis works best when all sites have several functional groups present, but not all. Therefore, it was run with pseudo-presences generated at two different thresholds, 50% and 85%. The higher threshold leaves many pixels with only 0 or 1 pseudo presence, making them difficult to classify. The lower threshold allows these depauperate pixels to be classified based on more pseudo-presences, and prevents them from being classified into units that are saturated.

**NOTE** Pixels were all classified based on the characteristics of any ice-free areas they overlap with. The idea is that when the final typology is finished, it can be changed into polygon format and clipped to the ice-free areas, and none of this area will be missing because of borderline pixels.

Most of the remaining pixels are on the mainland and less than 6km from a classified pixel; these were classified with their nearest neighbor. After this procedure only 251 pixels remained unclassified. A small sample of them did not contain any ice-free area.  


26 August 2020

Several developments since last time. I found an error in the data, a misalignment between the biotic and abiotic data. I fixed the problem and re-ran the cmeans consensus analysis including both biotic and abiotic data types, which yielded a sensible clustering solution. Also, in a conversation with John Alroy, he suggested I try factor analysis for a different soft-clustering approach, which I subsequently got working, again with both biotic and abiotic data included. I generated new draft typologies based on both of these hybrid approaches (cmeans consensus and factor analysis).

Group meeting at 12-1:30pm today. 
I took people through the methodologies described above. Group discussion, particularly input from Steven Chown, suggested we should not partition our habitats by ACBR. It was suggested that we try a hierarchical clustering approach wherein basic habitats are established using a clustering scheme on abiotic variables. I then suggested a separate cluster analysis could be run on each habitat, this time using the SDM data. This approach would relax the assumption that species suitability varies in a rigid way across different abiotic habitat types and allows for unique gradations of variation within each habitat type. There was general support for the factor analysis which seems simpler and more intuitive than the cmeans consensus.

We discussed independent validation of resulting candidate units, potentially using more detailed datasets from limited spatial extents. Another potential way to validate is to use SDMs which are intentionally withheld from the original input data, although this is not, strictly speaking, independent.

We discussed the island classification and the most supported course of action seemed to be to keep islands as separate, and potentially try to sub-classify them based on the SDM output data.

TO DO: 
1. Run FA on abiotic vars only (try different numbers of factors)
   - Generate summary statistics and grids; place in a shared folder on oneDrive for others to examine.
2. Run FA on a priori important abiotic vars and compare
3. Run FA on SDM vars within each habitat from step 1



9 September 2020

Recently finished full code for a hierarchical factor analysis using habitats first and SDM suitability second. Pixels without habitat data are classified using neighboring pixels if their centroids are on the mainland and they have a classified neighbour. Leftover pixels (usually islands) get their own habitat group. Each habitat gets a unique number of SDM-based subfactors. The number for each habitat is chosen based on variance explained (stop when adding a factor explains less than 1% more variance). Any pixels unclassified at the second level are again classified based on immediate neighbours, if possible. If not possible, they are left unclassified.

Produced a full typology using 9 habitats (+ islands/coast as a 10th), with a total of 50 units. Each of the top-level units also had a number of members that couldn't be classified with SDM-based factors (a total of 1884 pixels). 

I have thus far received very little feedback about the exploratory factor analyses I placed in oneDrive directly after the meeting. However, the current code can be easily modified to accommodate eventual decisions brought by the group. 


24 September 2020

On Aleks's suggestion, recently completed a dual factor analysis code that creates separate analyses for environmental data and SDM suitability data, and uses the intersection of the two for a candidate typology.  The hierarchical and dual factor analyses are identical on the first level, but some statistical tests confirm that there are significant similarities in the SDM-based classification when it is done within habitat units and for the whole continent at once. This is not surprising. Some visual checks, however, do show that very few units in the hierarchical analysis are more than 60% aligned with a unit in the dual analysis. 

The two candidate typologies seem to partially agree on areas with more or less spatial heterogeneity, though the dual analysis tends to have a bit less heterogeneity than the hierarchical analysis in any given locality, although not always. The dual factor analysis also has more units than the hierarchical analysis. 

I've fixed both analyses to be run on transformed data that more closely approximates normal distributions, removed distances (dist to coast, dist to geothermal), and fixed the nearest-neighbor analyses to work on all pixels such that only truly coastal pixels end up in the "islands" category. 

I'm beginning to work on a manuscript presenting the typology, thinking about how to frame such a paper.


9 Oct 2020

I've greatly abstracted, cleaned, and simplified the factor analysis code. It now performs hierarchical (environmental then sdm), dual (environmental and sdm for entire continent) and reverse hierarchical (sdm then environmental) factor analyses. 

A cursory analysis suggests reassuring amount of agreement between the two hierarchical approaches.
The dual analysis may show slightly better agreement with the reverse hierarchical approach (sdm factors first).


12 Nov 2020
First attempt at candidate typology "validation" is to see which typology (hierarchical, dual, or reverse hierarchical) aligns with greatest turnover between candidate units in point occurrences of species that were not used in the classification process (no SDM). So far, all measures point to the hierarchical candidate typology as providing the most turnover, though turnover is generally pretty low (similarity is high) among the candidate units. Reverse hierarchical approach is second best and the dual approach is worst. However, the difference between them is pretty small, a few percentage points at best. 

19 Nov 2020

Further rudimentary ecosystem validation shows the dual typology may be the best candidate.  It performs better (showing lower similarity between units) when the richness of units and their overlap is taken into account (simpairs null model) and also when correlations on the relative abundance of species in each unit is considered. Simple beta-diversity metrics are likely skewed here because of large discrepancies in the occupancy of ecosystem units (some contain hundreds of species, other only a handful). Possible zero-inflated poisson model to check coefficient estimates between ecosystem units???


14 Dec 2020

Met with Aleks and David.  We decided to stick with the hierarchical factor analysis. Time now to pivot toward individual ecosystem unit draft descriptions. I will start an R markdown doc which will have maps and descriptions of each ecosystem. Some points fromt the meeting: 
1. We will consider further splitting any ecosystems that occur in disparate locations across the continent.
2. Need to pick out most distinctive or common biotia and environmental factors for each unit in a standardised way. 
3. Begin compiling literature for each unit or group of units. 


10 May 2021

Profiles of ecosystem units have been completed in the interim. Workshop with small group of experts has been held in Hobart, with very positive feedback (at end of March 2021). Profiles were produced in word doc format and shortened/simplified for broader dissemination. New profiles included expanded descriptions and photos of ecosystem units where possible. Extensive maps were included as well, including summary maps of environmental groups and maps of individual units.

A manuscript describing the typology has been drafted and shared with Aleks and David. They will likely need to add citations and write a few paragraphs.

While in Hobart we met with Jonny Stark who gave us some good leads on data types needed for the nearshore typology. These need to be followed up with experts and data curators. 

A regional version of the terrestrial ice-free typology is underway, with units being split by ACBR, then subjected to a potential merging scheme that unifies ecosystems that are similar and broadly adjacent/contiguous (e.g. same ecosystem type in two neighbouring ACBRs). Possibility of discarding very small ecosystems that cannot be merged (largest is 40 pixels, likely 15-20km2 max). Regional-scale units will likely end up being the units that are risk-assessed under the IUCN RLE.


18 June 2021

We have responses and comments from about 6 people so far (R Leihy, D Hodgson, K Hughes, P Convey, D Cowan, S Bostrom) and still waiting on 2 who expressed interest (Mark Stevens and Charles Lee). Did not receive replies from 2 initial contacts. Three additional contacts who are familiar with DML were suggested by S Bostrom and need to be contacted. 

Initial comments are cautiously positive so far for the most part. Many people asked for more information about the methods and data, which I responded to individually by email. I have asked people to indicate when they can meet via zoom but so far no one has replied to that query. 

Main comments so far: 
1. Queries about the variable selection process and suggestions for other variables to include. Geology, wind direction, topographic positioning index, albedo, and data on prokaryotes/soil microbiomes have all been brought up. 

2. Suggestions for how to clarify and standardise terminology when naming units, and comments about the appropriateness of current word choice in some cases.

3. Observations about likely regional variation within units, especially for units that occur in multiple places around Antarctica

4. Inclusion of lakes

5. Citing more of the existing literature and incorporating or referencing existing classification schemes. Possibility of using them as validation.


Next steps:
1. We need to send reminders to the people who promised replies but haven't sent them.
2. We need to contact any additional people who haven't yet been contacted.
3. A group email to everyone who has expressed interest, potentially with a summary of the comments so far and asking to schedule zoom meetings individually. Potentially share the manuscript draft as well, or is it too early for this?
4. Possibly, an updated version of the typology/descriptions based on the comments so far, although no one has suggested a massive overhaul. Main structural concerns seem to revolve around data availability and variable selection. I need some decisions/answers around whether we can redo the analyses with better data coverage (as Aleks has discussed with Ben Raymond), as well as thoughts from both of you on including any additional variables and settling on a less subjective variable selection process? I don't want to rewrite the descriptions yet if we are going to make any major changes such as these.
5. Some analyses revealing the relatedness of the ecosystems (e.g. PCA or dendrogram-style).
 

12 August 2021

Following discussions with Aleks and Ben Raymond at the AAD data centre, we decided to rerun the classification using new higher-resolution versions of the initial abiotic data inputs. New layers were provided by Ben.

This is partially in response to comments from the group pointing out that the difference between env1 and env6 was dodgy because it was based on missing data. The new higher resolution data layers will allow us to formally classify pixels formerly in Env6. 

Additionally, I decided to pare down the number of variables included, removing sumptemp, ModisTemp, and DDminus5 as these are all correlated with meanTemp and did not add much to the classification judging by previous results. ModT also could not be extracted for edge pixels and DDminus5 had a highly skewed distribution not easily normalisable by conventional means. Though available, we also did not use aspect, which is a direct input of the calcualtion for the solar radiation layer. The fresh classification was thus run with 9 variables: c("cloud", "wind", "meanTemp", "melt","elevation", "rugosity", "slope", "totPrecip", "solar") 

Using the same procedure as previously described, I ran the hierarchical factor analysis (i.e., with minimum loading of 0.3 at the top level and minimum loading of 0.35 at the bottom level). The top level classification yielded 5 environments, and the second level yielded 5, 5, 6, 6, and 6 units for each environment, respectively. Next step is to undertake a comparison of the typologies to see which previous units have direct analogues in the new typology.


23 August 2021
The last attempt at the typology yielded ok results but the poor resolution of the SMD layers made the ecosystem units awkward and chunky. I produced 100m resolution versions of the SDM layers using cubic interpolation. Visual check confirms the results seem reasonable, without any outliers. 

I reran the typology with these smoother SDM layers, which should give more realistic results esp. when large unbroken areas of habitat exist, such as in the dry valleys. The top level classification yielded 5 environments, and the second level yielded 5, 5, 7, 6, and 5 units for each environment, respectively.

This new classification will be used to produce V5 of the typology and compare with V3 as described above.


20 September 2021
As of today the updated (V5) 100m resolution typology has been completed and described unit-by-unit. Text from the descriptions of V3 has been recycled where strong overlap between units was found, however, the improved resolution of the typology has ensured that most pixels of the previous typology are broken into 2 or more ecosystems in the new typology. The overview document and the reports have been updated to describe each unit based on 50% confidence ellipses around pairs of related variables (slope-elevation, melt-precip etc.). I have also found satellite images of nearly every ecosystem using Google Earth Pro. Because of the good resolution, it is clear from satellite photos where the ecosystem delineations are in most cases and it's often possible to tell how they relate to one another (e.g. sunny and shadowed slopes on the same nunatak). Also, I made a glossary of terms which should help clarify and standardise the language used to describe units across the entire typology. I made an effort to improve grammar, capitalisation, etc. throughout the unit descriptions, though another check through would probably be prudent.


There are some comments that came up in the elicitation process which have not been addressed properly yet:

1. Inclusion of additional variables: Geology, wind direction, topographic positioning index, albedo, and data on prokaryotes/soil microbiomes have all been brought up. Likely it is not actually feasible to include these.

2. Lakes and geothermal areas have not been superimposed.

3. Need to bring in and cite existing literature wherever possible. This represents likely quite a lot of work, and it's not necessarily obvious which papers would pertain to which units. However, there is probably some value to at least attempting some match-ups. 

29 September 2021

Last week of work before maternity leave. Met with David today and updated him on all the new materials plus chatted about what might be achieved while I'm away. 

1. David to familiarise himself with new unit reports and attempt to add citations in cases where there is a clear connection. 
2. David to potentially send updated typology report to elicitation group for a second round of comments with targeted questions. 
3. Aleks, Stephen to add to manuscript discussion, facilitated by David. 
4. Aleks to progress on lakes and geothermal areas to be added to the typology.

I uploaded the current/updated version of the typology manuscript to the google drive folder. It has been updated to reflect the new typology and incorporate comments from Aleks and David from the first draft. New figures included also. 



7 Sept 2022

Return from maternity leave on 22 August. Working 0.4 FTE.
In first week, I redid the regional classification with the high-res typology. This is now waiting for approval by other group members.

In second week I worked over the manuscript, accepting edits, updating figures and adding/updating tables. The MS looks pretty good now, and it's just waiting for finalised appendices and ecosystem overlays including rookeries, lakes, and geothermal areas. Appendices will be as follows: Appendix S1 - Typology Overview, Appendix S2 - Biotic assemblage (ecosystem unit) profiles, Appendix S3: Regional ecosystem subgroups maps.

This is my third week and I've begun to look at the overlay ecosystem types. Here is where we stand:

Rookeries: we have a point dataset of 635 rookeries for the continent (including 62 on Elephant Island, which I think must not be included in the ice free rock layer) and these can be incorporated easily. Of these, 160 are on ice free areas, and 262 are on or within 200m of an ice free area. Need to decide: do we include rookeries that are not on ice free areas (and some not plotting on mapped land at all)? In what radius does the nutrient flux from a rookery influence the biotic assemblage in the area?

Lakes: Howe et al Lake layer not public. Can I be provided with a link to the layer being compiled by AAD? It's ok if it's not fully complete. 

Volcanoes and geothermal areas: Fraser 2014 provides coordinates of 9 volcanoes and 1 non-volcanic geothermal area. Most are easily mappable as they have their own continuous or compound IFA, or are islands. Two are not on ice free areas (do we include?). One site (Royal society range) consists of multiple basaltic vents-- I can see the soil colour difference and little cone shaped vents on satellite and am confident I could make a map of the exact areas where the soil is influenced by the volcanic activity. I think volcanic and geothermal sites should be two different units though. 

Fraser 2014 also maps 7 other active or dormant volcanic sites in Marie Byrd land and Ellsworth Land but doesn't provide their coordinates bcause they were not used in the study. I'd ask for the coordinates but they're pretty easy to see on the IFA raster -- almost all non-coastal IFAs in MB Land and Ellsworth Land are formed by these volcanoes. EDIT: there is a list of Antarctic volcanoes and their coordinates on Wikipedia (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_volcanoes_in_Antarctica). Finally, the book on the topic (Volcanoes of the Antarctic Plate and Southern Ocean) also identifies a large number of inactive volcanoes. This is an interesting one, because I'd imagine that their volcanic history probably still influences the soil/rock properties at these sites but obviously they wouldn't be a source of heat, ash, or gases like the active/dormant sites. 

Finally, there's the question of what to do with rookeries that are ON volcanoes. I would be leaning toward classifying these areas as rookeries since most would be small and nested inside the volcano site. 


14 Sept 2022

Following advice from Aleks, I've made the following progress:

PENGUINS
Rookery data were re-downloaded in their raw form from https://www.penguinmap.com/
Emperor penguin colonies were removed, as they breed on ice and are thus out of scope. 

The remaining three species' colony observations had measurements in up to three ways: nest count, adult count, or chick count. We wanted to use the size of the colony to help identify how many raster cells should be classed as rookery, so we needed a way to translate between the different types of counts. We calculated the mean ratio of chicks:nests and adults:nests for each species where observations were taken from the same colony in the same year. We then repeated the process but using averages over all observed years for a given colony-- this produced similar values for those that could be cross-validated against the year-resolution method and gave us non-NA values for adult:nest ratios for chinstrap penguins, which could not be calculated for the finer resolution. To calculate a final value for breeding pairs, we equated nest counts with breeding pairs, then used the adult/chick counts divided by the ratios to estimate breeding pairs for sites where there was no nest count available. 

Colony population size thus standardized, we needed to translate the colony's population to a spatial footprint (area in hectares, since each grid square equals one hectare). For this we turned to LaRue et al. (2014), in which a table of penguin colony sizes and spatial extent was published (Table 1). Colony population size has previously been shown to explain over 98% of the variation in colony spatial extent (Woehler & Riddle 1998) in a linear relationship, so we calculated a linear regression and used the formula thus obtained to calculate colony spatial area from the number of breeding pairs. 

These areas will be used to produce a binary raster of penguin rookeries that will be overlaid on the typology. Rookeries under 1 ha will be represented by a single grid cell and larger rookeries will be represented by the appropriate number of grid cells in the nearest ice-free area (algorithm tbd - some locations appear inaccurate). 

VOLCANOES: 
I have created polygons of all known Antarctic volcanoes that are not sub-glacial, by hand in google earth. 
These will be clipped to land areas to make their boundaries more accurate for those that are islands. 
For the purposes of the typology, they will also be clipped to ice-free areas. 

Using published resources we will classify each volcano as active, dormant, or inactive. Only active and dormant volancoes will be included as volcanic areas for the purposes of the typology. Need to check dormant volcanoes and see how long ago they erupted; Aleks thinks that eruptions over ~1000 years ago are no longer relevant for the purposes of an ecosystem typology. 

The Balleny Islands and Elephant island will need to be excluded as these are outside of the extent of the ice-free rock layer or the typology raster.


LAKES: 
Lakes layer was downloaded from https://data.bas.ac.uk/collections/e74543c0-4c4e-4b41-aa33-5bb2f67df389/
This will likely be used as-is with no subclassifications. 


21 September 2022

I classified the volcano sites into four categories: 

Volcanic - active volcanoes that have erupted in the past 1000 years, have been observed with fumaroles, or that likely serve as a source of geothermal heat. Mts Terror and Terra Nova were included in the volcanic group despite older activity due to close proximity to Erebus, whose eruption likely had effects on these areas (ash, gasses, etc.).
Dormant - Older volcanoes that erupted 1ka - 100ka and are likely to be the site of enriched volcanic soils. Also possible sites of glacial refugia due to older activity and thus may have unique biotas. 
Inactive - Volcano inactive or extinct, too old to have substantial effects on typology. These are to be classified with regular ice free areas.
Geothermal - A single case of this is the Broknes peninsula which is ice-free due to the radioactive decay of very old rocks. 

Calculated buffer radii for penguin colongies based on estimated area in ha. This was 2*sqrt(area*10000/pi), the multiplication by 2 is to account for colonies that are directly on coastline, thereby placing half their area on the ocean. Colonies over 100k breeding pairs were manually checked/corrected to ensure their footprints overlapped with visible guano stains from satellite footage. Buffer zones were then clipped to land. 

Discovered some misalignment between the ice free layer and the antarctic coast; this could be fixed with a more recent ice free layer that appears to improve the problem in most relevant areas. Main issue is that the biotic layers were clipped to the original IFAs so new areas may not get classified anyway... One partial solution would be to clip the typology to land which may exclude some outcrops but at least won't classify non-land areas???

Next steps: rasterise overlays and use raster calculator to create new typology layer. Volcanoes: INTERACTION with typology, rookeries and lakes will override existing classification or extend the raster data.


22 Sept 2022

Decided on how to fix the mis-alignments. I will grab rock outcrop pixels from the new layer that aren't in the old one and use "predict" function to insert them into the typology. This is also handy because the method will allow us to classify any new pixels that become ice-free if needed. 

I will go forward with the UNION of the two ice-free layers thus obtained, which will be clipped strictly to land for the final typology. This approach ensures that all ice-free areas are represented but might result in some areas that aren't truly ice-free being included in the typology. I can quantify what these pixels may be in terms of classification (provide error margins to areas etc.).

Today I started this process and began rasterising my overlay layers. 


28 September 2022

Spent today updating all of the methods for the overlays in the manuscript, adding citations, etc. 

I also finished rasterizing the three overlays (penguins, volcanoes, and lakes). 
I combined the two rock outcrop layers and then the volcanoes, penguins, and lakes into a pre-final typology raster. 

Some observations: 
- many volcanic areas have a tiny rim of non-volcanic pixels around them-- apparently the land clipping was more stringent for the volcanic layer...
- the automatic rock outcrop layer is missing biotic data in several places that are surrounded by a solid bloc of pixels in the same unit. These should probably be categorised with their neighbours???


16 October 2022

As of the end of the day today the manuscript is largely ready to be sent around to all coauthors. The typology has been fully combined and the manuscript updated to reflect the overlays and methods. Bibliography has been cleaned up as well. 

I am working on doing a final re-run of all classification steps to ensure that they agree with what was written in the ms. 

21 November 2022
On request of coauthors, redoing all ecosystem descriptions on union of rock layers. New factor analysis and ecosystem profiles need to be generated. Have been working on this process for several weeks. 

8 December 2022

Finishing up making the new ecosystem profiles on Katana.

24 Feb 2023

Feedback from a large pool of coauthors has been received and we are in the process of making edits to satisfy the comments we received. 

The feedback can be broadly categorised into three groups
1. Framing -- need to clarify the rationale, uniqueness, and utility of the typology in the intro/discussion and ensure that the language is approachable to the intended audience, including Antarctic researchers and policy makers. I had a first pass at this, Aleks will add to it today and David will have a say next week. 
2. Methods were not always clear or easy to follow. I updated the methods with plain-english descriptions and examples of what was done to produce the typology; Aleks to add more today regarding the use of functional taxon distribution models in the second tier of the classification process. The use of these models was a major source of confusion and needs a lot more description in the ms. 
3. Results. Several people were skeptial of the widespread distributions of many of the ecosystems resulting from the classificaton. I updated the language, terminology and descriptions to help. Biotic assemblages were re-termed "habitats" to avoid the impression that we know the actual biota in these systems. Regional variants are now referred to as ecosystems. 

Further, the text was updated to refer to units, habitats, and ecosystems by name whenever possible. I also re-ordered the codes of the units to grade generally from low to high elevation and make them easier to remember; consequently I need to redo the profiles as well in the new order. 


8 March 2023

Most comments have been addressed, Aleks and David making their own edits on the paper now. 
Terminology changed to "major environmental units" for tier 1, "habitat complexes" for tier 2, and "regional ecosystem types" for the regional ecosystems. 

Major environmental units have been re-ordered to make them easier to remember, going from lowest to highest elevation. Maps, figures, and appendices have to be redone to reflect this. Manuscript figures and appendix A has been done, appendix B still in progress. 

3 May 2023

Spent some time exploring alternative scaling schemes for the input data into the factor analysis tier 2. Discovered that alternative scaling schemes (no scaling and not logging the variables) result in clearly poor performance of the factor analysis when looking at spatial coherence of resulting classification. Therefore I elected to keep the same scaling scheme as I was already using: rescale values to [1:100] and take the natural logarithm. 

A new draft of the paper has been circulated to a small group, including three people from BAS and Steven Chown. The draft has new figures to reflect the changes in the paper and a new map of Tier 1 with insets focused on particular areas of interest. Though requiring some restructuring and futher drill down on the methods, the changes needed now are relatively minor judging by the comments in this round. 

4 August 2023 

Near-final versions of the paper are circulating among the coauthors. 
Did the 2022-23 milestone report today. 

Since the last update, had extensive discussions about the scaling issues with the input data (including consult with Simon Wotherspoon at AAD). We are choosing to frame some new wording to help better justify our approach rather than redoing the classification. The approach we took is defensible, if unusual. Some changes to wording to better represent factor analysis outputs were discussed as well. 

Here are notes from that session: 
Stepped approach
-	Step 1 env groups  major gradients identified a priori as relevant to all ecosystems
-	Step 2 biotic groups  subgroups informed by presence of key spp (but species predictions are highly skewed, so need tansformation)
Double log transform  suppresses diffs between large values  done twice for two reasons
-	Very limited primary obs data  expected influential outliers
-	Diffs between low abundance more ecologically informative than diffs between high abundance because the latter are driven by stochastic and transient factors including habitual behaviour rather than habitat suitability
-	Single transformation was insufficient to address the extreme influence of this superabundance and produced no coherent relationships among groupings in environmental space, hence a second transformation was applied and revealed interpretable ecological patterns (show comparative plots in Supp Mat)
Terminology 
-	Segment (implying a portion of a gradient, and by association, of multiple gradients), could be the best intermediate term to use for the output of the factor analysis on the way to defining the formal groupings of the typology (terms already decided for those). Segment would be better than facet, group and other suggested terms.
Positive and negative loadings
-	The negative loadings are fewer and weaker than the positives (potentially noise)
-	The negative loadings are informative about absences, which may represent outcomes of competitive interactions, but the positive values of their competitors are more relevant to the classification

In the current late stage of the project, main tasks are: 
1. updating the wording of the methods in the manuscript
2. Finalising the regional units and producing final maps for them. 
3. Final round of edits from all coauthors. 

23 August 2023

Working on finalising the Regional Ecosystem Types. Logic tree has been reviewed and is being re-run. 
Threshold for standalone RETs is 5000 pixels (~40km2). Small un-mergeable RETs will be retained and flagged for follow-up/field investigation in the manuscript. 

1 Sept 2023
Manuscript is ready for new round. 
Addressing some residual comments on the appendices from the last small-group round. 
Appendix 3 with bioregional ecosystem types is ready. 
Still need to produce new ecosystem profiles with better regional maps, in response to several comments from coauthors. Katana working on this now. 



